; vim: tw=80 et ts=2 sw=2

Package management
==================

When speaking about "package management", one has to clarify what a "package" in
the context of an operating system represents. Traditionally, a package is the
unit of delivery of a bunch of "dumb" files, usually wrapped up in a compressed
archive. A package may depend on the presence of other packages. Thereby, a
dependency graph is formed. To express how packages fit with each other, a
package is usually accompanied by meta data (description). Depending on the
package manager, package descriptions follow certain formalisms (e.g.,
package-description language) and express more-or-less complex concepts such as
versioning schemes or the distinction between hard and soft dependencies.

Genode's package management does not follow this notion of a "package". Instead
of subsuming all deliverable content under one term, we distinguish different
kinds of content, each in a tailored and simple form. To avoid the clash of the
notions of the common meaning of a "package", we speak of "archives" as the
basic unit of delivery. Archives are named with their version as suffix,
appended via a slash. This results in the following scheme for
architecture-independent archives:

! <type>/<name>/<version>

Binary archives, on the other hand, are architecture-specific and adhere to a
slightly different scheme that includes the target architecture:

! <type>/<name>/<arch>/<version>

This section focuses on depot-archive management with Goa. For a more
general explanation of archive categories, please refer to Section "Package
management" in the Genode Foundations book.

With Goa, depot archives are created and published by the commands 'goa export'
and 'goa publish'. Depending on the project-directory content, Goa creates the
necessary depot archives. The project directory therefore follows the depot
nomenclature.

:raw archive:

  A raw-data archive contains arbitrary data that is independent of the
  processor architecture. If there is a _raw/_ subdirectory, Goa takes its
  entire content to create a raw archive named after the project.

:src archive:

  A source archive contains to-be-compiled source code. Goa creates a source
  archive for a project if there exists a _src/_ subdirectory. The directory
  content can either be manually managed or imported (see 'goa help import').
  Goa also creates a corresponding, equally-named, binary (bin) archive
  containing the build artifacts as specified in the project's _artifacts_ file
  (see 'goa help artifacts'). Genode binaries are stripped from debug
  information. Instead, this information is made available in separate debug
  info files. Goa deals with downloading, exporting and publishing of the
  corresponding debug (dbg) archives when provided with the '--debug' switch.

:api archive:

  An API archive is typically associated with a shared library and is meant
  to provide all the ingredients for building components that use this library.
  The archive contains header files and the library's binary
  interface in the form of an ABI-symbols file. Unless it is a header-only
  library, the API archive is accompanied by an equally-named source and binary
  archive. Goa creates an API archive if there is an _api_ file in the
  project directory (see 'goa help api').

:pkg archive:

  A package archive specifies what ingredients are needed to deploy and execute
  a certain scenario. It comprises three files: _archives_, _runtime_ and
  _README_. The _archives_ file lists the names of all required raw, source, or
  package archives. The _runtime_ file describes the required/provided services
  and the subsystem configuration (see Section [Runtime configuration]). Goa
  allows maintaining multiple package archives in the same project directory. It
  expects the content of each package archive in a _pkg/<name>/_ subdirectory.

:index:

  An index describes the available package archives within a depot. Goa creates
  a depot index if there is an _index_ file present in the project directory
  (see 'goa help index').
